[esc] secret rotation blog post (#13482)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/esc-secret-rotation-with-iac/index.md

---
title: "Secret Rotation with Pulumi ESC"
date: 2024-12-02T11:23:17-08:00
draft: false
meta_desc: "Extending ESC to perform automated secret rotation."
meta_image: meta.png
authors:
    - claire-gaestel
tags:
  - esc
  - secrets
---

> Managing secrets in modern cloud applications is challenging, particularly when it comes to rotation policies. While dynamic secrets (like AWS IAM temporary credentials) handle this automatically, many systems still rely on static secrets that need periodic rotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing secrets in modern cloud applications can be challenging, particularly when it comes to rotation policies. While dynamic secrets (like AWS IAM temporary credentials) handle this automatically, many systems still rely on static secrets that require periodic rotation.
```

> Static secrets, like database passwords or API keys, [should be rotated regularly to maintain security](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Secrets_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#272-rotation), but services depending on these secrets need time to transition to new credentials to avoid downtime. This makes rotating credentials error-prone, and often forgotten.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static secrets, like database passwords or API keys, [should be rotated regularly to maintain security](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Secrets_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#272-rotation), and services depending on these secrets need time to transition to new credentials to avoid downtime. This makes rotating credentials error-prone, and often forgotten.
```

> In this post, we'll explore an approach for automating static secret rotation using [Pulumi ESC](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/esc/).

Reviewer 2: Should we mention IaC here?

<!--more-->

## A pattern for extending ESC

> ESC does not currently have built-in support for automatic static secret rotation, however, we can take advantage of ESC’s integration with [Pulumi Deployments](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/) to create an ergonomic way of managing rotation schedules ourselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can take advantage of ESC’s integration with [Pulumi Deployments](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/) to create an ergonomic way of managing rotation schedules ourselves.
```

We’ll start by defining a custom declarative configuration format for managing a rotation schedule:

```yaml
# we'll create our own "extended" fn config for ESC
xfn::pulumi-scheduled-update:
  # stack reference to a pulumi program that manages a rotated secret
  stack: "example-rotator-stack-reference/dev"
  # schedule that will drive an automatic scheduled deployment
  scheduleCron: "0 0 * * 0"
  # trigger a manual unscheduled rotation whenever this value changes
  trigger: "break-glass"
```

> Using webhooks, we’ll monitor when the environment is updated, then search for these configuration blocks, and use them to drive scheduled deployments of a stack that rotates credentials. Using ESC’s composition primitives, we can  combine this rotation schedule config with a `fn::open::pulumi-stacks` provider to read the current secret value from the rotator stack to provide to our application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using webhooks, we’ll monitor when the environment is updated, then search for these configuration blocks, and use them to drive scheduled deployments of a stack that rotates credentials. Using ESC’s composition primitives, we can combine this rotation schedule config with a `fn::open::pulumi-stacks` provider to read the current secret value from the rotator stack to provide to our application.
```

> Using webhooks, we’ll monitor when the environment is updated, search for these configuration blocks, and use them to drive scheduled deployments of a stack that rotates credentials for us. Then, using ESC’s composition primitives, we combine this rotation schedule config with a `fn::open::pulumi-stacks` provider to read the current secret value from the rotator stack to provide to our application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using webhooks, we’ll monitor when the environment is updated, then search for these configuration blocks, and use them to drive scheduled deployments of a stack that rotates credentials. Using ESC’s composition primitives, we can  combine this rotation schedule config with a `fn::open::pulumi-stacks` provider to read the current secret value from the rotator stack to provide to our application.
```

Here is how the solution fits together:
![Architecture](architecture.svg)
Let's break down each component and see how they work together to solve our rotation challenges.

### The Rotator: Managing Credential Lifecycles

> At the heart of our solution is a [generic `Rotator` component](https://github.com/pulumi/esc-examples/blob/claire/esc-rotation-example/rotate/example/rotator/rotator.ts) that manages credential pairs. It's designed to handle any type of static secret while ensuring zero-downtime rotations. The way it does this is by maintaining two versions of each secret: “current” and “previous”.  Each time the stack is deployed, “current” is replaced with a newly provisioned credential, the old value is demoted to “previous”, and the old previous credential is decommissioned. Crucially, the demoted secret _remains valid_, which allows consuming services enough time to switch over to the new secret.

Reviewer 2: Should we merge this example to reference the main branch instead of `claire`?

> At the heart of our solution is a [generic `Rotator` component](https://github.com/pulumi/esc-examples/blob/claire/esc-rotation-example/rotate/example/rotator/rotator.ts) that manages credential pairs. It's designed to handle any type of static secret while ensuring zero-downtime rotations. The way it does this is by maintaining two versions of each secret: “current” and “previous”.  Each time the stack is deployed, “current” is replaced with a newly provisioned credential, the old value is demoted to “previous”, and the old previous credential is decommissioned. Crucially, the demoted secret _remains valid_, which allows consuming services time to switch to using the new secret.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the heart of our solution is a [generic `Rotator` component](https://github.com/pulumi/esc-examples/blob/claire/esc-rotation-example/rotate/example/rotator/rotator.ts) that manages credential pairs. It's designed to handle any type of static secret while ensuring zero-downtime rotations. The way it does this is by maintaining two versions of each secret: “current” and “previous”.  Each time the stack is deployed, “current” is replaced with a newly provisioned credential, the old value is demoted to “previous”, and the old previous credential is decommissioned. Crucially, the demoted secret _remains valid_, which allows consuming services enough time to switch over to the new secret.
```

```typescript
const creds = new Rotator("rotating-creds", {
    // rotate credentials on every deployment.
    trigger: Date().toString(),
    // create a set of equivalent credentials that will be rotated between.

>     // a particular credential should be replaced whenever`trigger` is updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // a particular credential should be replaced whenever `trigger` is updated.
```

        scheduleCron: "0 0 1 * *"  # monthly rotation
    secrets:
      fn::open::pulumi-stacks:
        stacks:
          keys:
            stack: ${api-keys.stack}

  environmentVariables:
    DB_CONNECTION_STRING: ${db-credentials.secrets.credentials.current}
    API_KEY: ${api-keys.secrets.keys.current}
```

This configuration demonstrates how our custom extension is able to seamlessly integrate with ESC to manage multiple rotating secrets with different schedules declaratively, co-located with dynamic retrieval of the latest credentials from the rotator stack outputs. Applications consuming this environment will automatically receive the latest credentials without any additional configuration.

## Trying it out

Open the example environment and take note of the current secrets:

```
❯ pulumi env open esc-rotation-demo/test db-credentials.secrets
{
  "credentials": {
    "current": "OBA=wxS:VT",
    "lastUpdate": "2024-11-26T17:49:03.000Z",
    "previous": "MUgPXkJ+kE"
  }
}
```

Now lets force a rotation by changing the manual trigger:

```
❯ pulumi env set esc-rotation-demo/test \
    db-credentials.schedule.xfn::pulumi-scheduled-update.trigger \
    break-glass2
```

> After a few minutes we can see that the secret has rotated successfully! We can also see that the previous secret remains valid, giving currently deployed consumers time to update to the new credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a few minutes we can see that the secret has rotated successfully! We can also observe that the previous secret remains valid, giving currently deployed consumers time to update to the new credentials.
```

```
$ pulumi env open esc-rotation-demo/test db-credentials.secrets
{
  "credentials": {
    "current": "X2WSmF3+29",
    "lastUpdate": "2024-11-26T17:57:05.000Z",
    "previous": "OBA=wxS:VT"      <---- old "current" has been demoted
  }
}
```

## Conclusion

Secret rotation doesn't have to be a manual, error-prone process. By leveraging Pulumi ESC and this component architecture, we can automate and streamline the rotation of static secrets while maintaining system stability and security. The solution is flexible enough to handle various types of secrets while being simple to configure and maintain. This approach offers several advantages:

- Automated: Set-and-forget secret rotation
- Zero-downtime: Smooth transitions between credentials
- Flexible: Works with any type of static secret
- Declarative: Configuration through ESC environments
- Auditable: Clear tracking of rotation history
- Scalable: Easy to manage across multiple environments

> [The complete example is available for your perusal here.](https://github.com/pulumi/esc-examples/pull/3)

Reviewer 2: We should merge this and update this URL
